1 | C S 4 4 5  
 
CS445 Software Process Management  
HOS07A – Security  
 
05/13/2023 Developed by Kina Anh Bui 
05/15/2025 Reviewed by Sam Chung 
02/27/2026 Revised by Scott Zhou 
 
School of Technology & Computing (STC) 
City University of Seattle (CityU)  
 
 
Before You Start   
• 
Screenshots may be different from your environment.  
• 
The directory path shown in screenshots may be different from yours.  
• 
The steps might have subtle discrepancies. Please use your best judgment while completing each 
step in this cookbook-style tutorial. 
• 
Some steps may not be explained in detail. If you are not sure what to do:  
1. Consult the resources from the course.    
2. If you cannot solve the problem after a few tries (usually 15 -30 minutes), ask a TA for help.  
    
 
Learning Outcomes 
● Experiencing SQL Injection 
 
 
Resources 
• 
Loubser, N. (n.d.-b). Software Engineering for Absolute Beginners: Your Guide to Creating Software 
Products. O'Reilly Online Learning. https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/software-engineering-
for/9781484266229/ 
 
Key Concepts 
 
This HOS explains how SQL injection can harm the database system and how to manage it to lessen its 
effects. 
 
SQL Injection 
 
SQL injection is a mechanism that can be used to hack databases. This method allows a malicious actor to 
steal, alter, or destroy data. Preventing SQL attacks requires some simple changes. (Loubser, n.d.-d). 
 
Note: The exercise demonstrates using GitHub CodeSpaces; you can run the project in your preferred 
environment such as Visual Studio Code. 
Section 1: Accessing GitHub Codespaces 
 
Follow the instructions here.  
 
GitHub Codespaces are online cloud-based development environments that allow you to easily write, run, 
and debug your code. It is fully integrated with your GitHub repository and provides a seamless experience 
for developers. 
 
Prerequisites:  
• 
Create your GitHub account. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2 | C S 4 4 5  
 
Section 2: Create folder structure 
 
 
 
 
sql-injection –lab 
--app_secure.py 
--app_vunlnerable.py 
--requirements.txt 
--setup_db.py 
 
Write the following source code in the requirements.txt file  
 
 
 
Section 3: Setup mysql with sqlite3 
 
 

3 | C S 4 4 5  
 
Run this file, install all dependencies if prompted, and use virtual environment as best practice. Demo.db 
will be generated. 
 
Section 4: Experience sql injection 
 
Write following code in app_vulnerable.py 
 
 
Run the code  
 
Try normal login 
• 
username: alice 
• 
password: alicepass 

4 | C S 4 4 5  
 
 
Try SQL injection bypass (safe demo payload) 
• 
username: admin' -- 
• 
password: anything 
 
Update app.secure.py 
 
Run and try the bypass credentials 
 
 

5 | C S 4 4 5  
 
 
 
Section 5: Pushing Your Work to GitHub  
 
Please submit the source code to GitHub. 
 
How to submit your work in GitHub  
 
 
 
