 
 
 
 1 | CS445 
 
CS445 Software Process Management 
HOS06A – UML Visual Modeling 
  
05/07/2025 Developed by Kina Anh Bui 
05/08/2025 Reviewed by Sam Chung 
12/04/2025 Reviewed by Clark Ngo 
 
School of Technology & Computing (STC) 
City University of Seattle (CityU)  
  
 
Before You Start   
• 
Screenshots may be different from your environment.  
• 
The directory path shown in screenshots may be different from yours.  
• 
The steps might have subtle discrepancies. Please use your best judgment while completing each 
step in this cookbook-style tutorial. 
• 
Some steps may not be explained in detail. If you are not sure what to do:  
1. Consult the resources from the course.    
2. If you cannot solve the problem after a few tries (usually 15 -30 minutes), ask a TA for help.  
    
Readings and Examples:  
• Visit the CS 445 Repository for Examples. 
o 
Select the related module. 
o 
Visit the README.md file. 
o 
Find examples for your practice. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
● Section 1: Activity Diagram 
● Section 2: Creating a Sign-Up Activity Diagram 
● Section 3: Use Case Diagrams 
● Section 4: Pushing Your Work to GitHub  
 
Upload the following to your GitHub Repository generated from GitHub Classroom. 
1. Upload the screenshot of your ‘01 Activity Diagram’ as 
‘01_activity_diagram_firstname_lastname.png’ by using your first and last name. 
2. Upload the screenshot of your ‘02 Use Case Diagram’ as 
‘02_use_case_diagram_firstname_lastname.png’ by using your first and last name. 
 
Resources 
• 
Loubser, N. (n.d.-b). Software Engineering for Absolute Beginners: Your Guide to Creating Software 
Products. O'Reilly Online Learning. https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/software-engineering-
for/9781484266229/ 
• 
About the Unified Modeling Language Specification Version 2.5.1 
• 
FREE Tutorials: UML, ArchiMate, Flowchart, PERT, etc 
o UML Activity Diagram Tutorial 
o UML Use Case Diagram Tutorial 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 2 | CS445 
 
Key Concepts 
 
In this HOS, we will learn about creating Activity and Use Case diagrams using the Visual Paradigm 
Online platform. 
 
High-Level Models and Diagrams 
Diagrams can explain how the system works at a high level without the need to write code. These 
diagrams can help see how the data will flow through the system or a section and the execution paths. 
Numerous diagram conventions are available for this, each with advantages and disadvantages 
(Loubser, n.d.-c). 
 
OMG’s UML 
The Object Management Group (OMG)'s Unified Modeling Language (UML) is a standardized modeling 
language used to visualize, specify, construct, and document the artifacts of a software system. It 
provides a set of graphical notation techniques to create abstract models of systems, particularly 
software systems. 
 
Why Use UML? 
• 
Improves communication among stakeholders 
• 
Helps in system design and documentation 
• 
Aids in identifying system requirements and architecture 
• 
Facilitates code generation and reverse engineering in some tools 
 
Key Features 
1. Standardized Notation 
UML provides a common language for developers, analysts, and designers to communicate 
system structure and behavior. 
2. Multiple Diagram Types 
UML includes 14 types of diagrams (most popular diagrams in bold), grouped into: 
• 
Structure Diagrams (Class, Component, Deployment, Object, Composite Structure, 
Package) 
• 
Behavior Diagrams (Use Case, Activity, State Machine) 
• 
Interaction Diagrams (Sequence, Communication, Interaction Overview, Timing) 
3. Platform-Independent 
UML is not tied to any programming language or platform, making it versatile for various 
development environments. 
4. Extensibility 
UML supports stereotypes, tagged values, and constraints to extend its core elements for 
specific domains. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 3 | CS445 
 
Section 1: Activity Diagram 
 
Activity diagrams are the most used because they are easy to create and use. They need a few shapes to 
represent the ideas and can also show paths defining the execution flow (Loubser, n.d.-c). 
 
In this HOS, we will create an activity diagram for Sign Up flow. 
 
1) Go to https://online.visual-paradigm.com/ 
 
 
 
2) Follow the sign-up process or utilize the “Get Started for Free” option. 
 
 
 
3) Click on Create New, then Click on Diagram. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 4 | CS445 
 
4) Select Activity Diagram. 
 
 
 
5) Review this website to know more about the shapes and their meaning: https://www.visual-
paradigm.com/guide/uml-unified-modeling-language/what-is-activity-diagram/. 
 
Click on Diagram Shape to get all the basic diagram shapes. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 5 | CS445 
 
Section 2: Creating a Sign-Up Activity Diagram 
 
In this part, we will create a diagram representing the sign-up process in an authentication system. The 
first step is to gather user information. 
1) Click on the shapes to add them to the diagram until it looks like this picture. 
 
 
 
2) (Optional) Style the diagram by clicking on the Settings Panel. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 6 | CS445 
 
3) The next step is to verify if the information is correct. Continue adding elements until the diagram 
looks as follows. 
 
 
 
 
4) The next step is to check if the account already exists. Complete the diagram until it looks like the 
following picture. 
 
 
 
Take a screenshot of your ‘01 Activity Diagram’ as ‘01_activity_diagram_firstname_lastname.png’ by 
using your first and last name. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 7 | CS445 
 
Section 3: Use Case Diagrams  
 
A use case represents the interactions and operations a user, or actor, can carry out on a system. It 
classifies potential events but does not examine how they are resolved at runtime. Use case diagrams 
not only provide an overview of the system's features but are also helpful in identifying system 
requirements (Loubser, n.d.-c).  
 
In this HOS, we will create a Banking System Use Case Diagram. 
 
1) Click on Create New -> Diagram -> Use Case Diagram. (Hint: Type “Use” in the search bar). 
 
 
 
2) Select the shapes needed to create the diagram shown in the picture and create it. 
 
 
 
Take a screenshot of your ‘02 Use Case Diagram’ as ‘02_use_case_diagram_firstname_lastname.png’ by 
using your first and last name. 

 
 
 
 8 | CS445 
 
 
3) Saving Diagram: Click on File -> Save as… 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 9 | CS445 
 
Section 4: Pushing Your Work to GitHub  
 
How to submit your work in GitHub  
 
How to submit your screenshots on GitHub 
 
 
